Full Description of Experiment.


Set-up:

The experiment shall be done in a 4x3 tracking area (TA). Which means, with a 
wall thickness of 5cm, there will be room for a 95cm wide hallway and a 3x3 room.

The test subject (TS) will start the experiment in the virtual world facing north
40cm into the hallway positioned exactly in the middle (47.5cm).

There will be a permanent 10% movement speed increase in the VE to compensate for
slight amounts of drift during the course of the experiment. This means that the
TA only needs to be 91% of the TA that would be needed if there was no such speed
increase.

For this reason we will keep the outer part of the TA as a safe zone and only use
the inner 91% of the TA, a 3.64x2.73 rectangle in the middle of the actual TA.

In the physical environment the TS will be asked to stand on an X on the floor
at exactly 43.225cm from the left side of the safe zone of the TA and exactly 
36.4cm from the bottom. I will refer to this as the starting position.

Since it's inconvenient to keep refering to coordinates in that way, I will
define the bottom-left point of the safe zone of the TA as (0, 0). Furthermore
since scaling all the time is annoying, all numbers past here will be unscaled
and need to be scaled by 91%.

This means the actual TA will run from (-0.2, -0.15) to (4.2, 3.15), and the safe
zone of the TA runs from (0, 0) to (4, 3).


Process:

The goal of the experiment is to have the TS enter 5 numbered rooms in order,
close the blinds in each one with a button on the wall, exit the room and close 
the door behind them.

The closing of the blinds serves as a distractor for the fact that the door will
move on the wall. The door will move so that the outside center of the door
corresponds to exactly one half door-width above the bottom edge of the safe zone
of the VE. This means that if the TS were to walk through the middle of the door
and stop in the exact center of the hallway, he would be at the starting position
after exiting the room.

Note that it is not just the door moving, it is the entire hallway that moves.
This poses the obvious problem of the door for the "next" room appearing in the
middle of the current room. I will solve this by texturing the back of the doors
with the same texture as the wall, and by not indenting the door on the inside.

The consequence of this is that the TS has progressed up through the hallway
while still being at the starting position in the TA.

The closing of the door serves two purposes. The first purpose is to trigger the
yaw correction system reset.

The second purpose is only needed when the next door is not on the same wall of
the hallway. In this case, the yaw correction system will be temporarily turned
off. Then the rotation will be scaled a certain amount such that the wall with
the next door will be vertical in the TA. At the same time the coordinate system
of the positional tracking of the positrack system will be rotated as well, to
match the new rotated VE.


BEFORE:                    AFTER:

   v- Next                    

---+\                   |
    + <- Current        |
    |                   |
    |                   + <- Next
    |               ---+/

                       ^- Current


To do this, the system will take the angle the TS is facing in the VE, then
compares the angle where the TS wants to turn (towards the door) with the
location where the door will be after the coordinate system rotation and scales
the rotation in such a way that when the TS is facing the door in the VE, in the
TA he is facing where the door will be. The exact moment the door closing
animation is started, the entire world will rotate instantaneously.

Take for example the above situation, if the TS comes out of the "current" door
at an angle of 170 degrees, he will want to turn 170 degrees to the right or
190 degrees to the left. However, since world will be rotated 90 degrees
clockwise, he will actually need to rotate 80 degrees to the right or 280 degrees
to the left. Which represents a scaling of 47% to the right or 147% to the left.
These values are of course extremely noticeable in normal conditions, however,
we are testing if a task reduces the noticeability of this rotation.

It is at this point that the yaw correction is turned back on, with the weight
100% towards the HMD, it will then, over the course of several seconds, shift
towards 100% optitrack and reset the reported yaw of the HMD.

After doing this for all 5 rooms, the last door will open and there will be
a "The End" poster behind the door.

A map of the proposed layout is below:

           5   4   
          +---------+             1: Door to first room, starts open
     |:|  |         | 3         2-7: Door to room, opens when previous one closed
     |:|  | +-----+ |             E: Exit door
     | +--+ |     | |             X: Start
     P    E |     | | 2           P: Poster
     | +--+ |     | |            ::: Continues
     |:|  | |     | |
     |:|  | |     | | 1
          | |     | |
          |:|     |X|
          |:|     +-+


Other technical considerations:

YAW DRIFT CORRECTION:
The HMD has a certain amount of yaw drift. Since this could pose a serious issue
I will take a weighted average of the yaw reported by the HMD and that of the
optitrack system. The exact weights during normal operation are still to be
determined, but 60%/40% in favor of the HMD seems a good idea. Another 
possibility would be to change the weights in function of movement speed, though
this would need to be tested.

At certain points the system will be triggered to, over the course of half a
second or so, to increase the weight of the optitrack system to 100% and then
reset the reported yaw of the HMD to that point.

Pitch and roll seem to be less of an issue, however, if they do turn out to be an
issue, a similar system could be used to correct them.


TA DRIFT CORRECTION:
As explained in FAIL-SAFE it might be needed to drift the location of the TS back
to where it belongs, however, we will be doing this explicitly between doors 3
and 4 and doors 5 and E. Because the hallway rotation causes some TA drift.


WHEN TO REORIENT:
A potential issue is deciding exactly when to start the rotational distortion. I
will need to perform some heuristics to make sure the TS does not move while
rotating.


INSTRUCTIONS:
I will record myself giving instructions, and play them back during the course of
the first room.


FAIL-SAFE:
There are 3 ways in which the TS could exit the TA:

    1. If the TS bumps into stuff, the safe TA will drift.
    2. If the TS purposefully ignores instructions, he could walk out of the TA.
    3. In the reorientation, the TS is assumed to stand still while rotating, if
       he does not, he could step out of the TA. The safe TA will also move if
       the TS is not exactly in the middle of the hallway when the world rotates.

In all 3 cases, the system will simply display a red exclamation point and
teleport the TS to the location in the VE that should correspond to the physical 
location. Note that this will obviously move the safe TA around.

I could also slowly drift the location of the TS towards where he should be, this
solves problem 1 and 3, but not 2. I will ignore problem 2. This allows the
system to keep the safe TA in the middle of the TA.